Time Zones and Timestamps docs (#8660)
medplum/medplum: packages/docs/docs/scheduling/timezones.md

---
sidebar_label: Time Zones and Timestamps
sidebar_position: 20
---

# Time Zones and Timestamps

Handling time correctly in distributed systems can be surprisingly complex. Differences in time zones, daylight saving time transitions, and system clock configuration can introduce subtle bugs if timestamps are not handled consistently.

Medplum follows established industry practices and the FHIR specification to ensure that timestamps remain unambiguous, interoperable, and predictable across systems.

> This document explains how Medplum handles time zones and timestamps.

Reviewer: I think this line could be removed without much loss of clarity

This internal normalization does **not modify the stored FHIR resource JSON**.

### System-generated timestamps

Medplum-generated timestamps are always emitted in **UTC**.

Examples include:

- `meta.lastUpdated`
- audit events
- server logs
- bot execution timestamps

These timestamps appear in the following format:

```
2026-03-09T14:00:00Z
```

Using UTC ensures consistent ordering and interoperability across systems and regions.

## Time Zones in FHIR

FHIR represents timestamps using **ISO 8601** date/time formats.

FHIR date/time values may include:

| Format                      | Meaning                |
| --------------------------- | ---------------------- |
| `2026-03-09T14:00:00Z`      | UTC                    |
| `2026-03-09T09:00:00-05:00` | Local time with offset |

FHIR also includes several different temporal data types:

| Type       | Description                                            |
| ---------- | ------------------------------------------------------ |
| `date`     | A calendar date without a time                         |
| `dateTime` | A date and optional time, possibly with offset         |

> | `instant`  | A precise moment in time (always includes a time zone) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `instant`  | A dateTime specified to at least the second precision, with a time zone |
```
